ocis 5.0.0 release notes (#3)
owncloud/docs-main: modules/ROOT/pages/ocis_release_notes.adoc

[discrete]
=== 400% Faster Upload Preparation Time

In the latest update, we've implemented significant improvements in the efficiency of folder tree creation during file uploads. By optimizing the process to run asynchronously and reducing the number of PROPFIND requests on nested folders, we've managed to substantially speed up this operation. In a test scenario with a folder containing 155 subfolders, the time to create these folders has been reduced from 20-30 seconds to just 5-7 seconds. While this duration may still be noticeable, it represents a considerable improvement, especially considering the limitations of client-side operations.

Additionally, we've massively enhanced the upload preparation time. Rather than setting file data individually for each file, we now collect all necessary data first and then apply it in a single batch using Uppy's setState method. This approach streamlines the upload process, making it much quicker and more efficient for users.

[discrete]
=== Thumbnail Generation Using Image Processors

> When thumbnail creation is requested by the WebUI, the format can now be changed as part of the creation process. Previously images were always scaled to fit the given frame where it could happen, that images were cropped to fit making them often hard to identify. By defining a processor via the API, images can now be scaled to best fit a given frame.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When thumbnail creation is requested by the WebUI, the format can now be changed as part of the creation process. Previously images were always scaled to fit the given frame. In the process it could happen that images were cropped to fit, making them often hard to identify. By defining a processor via the API, images can now be scaled to best fit a given frame.
```

[discrete]

> === Experimental: Support of ADFS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Experimental: Support of AD FS
```

> Expermimental support fo AD FS has been added. AD FS `/adfs/.well-known/openid-configuration` has an optional `access_token_issuer` which, in violation of the OpenID Connect spec, takes precedence over `issuer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Experimental support for AD FS has been added. AD FS `/adfs/.well-known/openid-configuration` has an optional `access_token_issuer` which, in violation of the OpenID Connect spec, takes precedence over `issuer`.
```

[discrete]
=== Enhanced Extension Capabilities

> To enable customs Infinite Scale extensions, custom routes have been added to the Infinite Scale proxy service. More details can be found in the https://owncloud.dev/services/proxy/#configuring-routes[Developer Documentation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable custom Infinite Scale extensions, custom routes have been added to the Infinite Scale proxy service. More details can be found in the https://owncloud.dev/services/proxy/#configuring-routes[Developer Documentation].
```

[discrete]
=== Use Environment Variables in yaml Config Files

> The ability to use environment variables in yaml config files has been added to make it easier configuring Infinite Scale services. The value in the yaml file will be replaced by the actual value of the environment variable at runtime. This makes it possible to use the same config file for different environments without the need to change the config file itself, useful like when using docker compose with `.env` files to run Infinite Scale services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ability to use environment variables in yaml config files has been added to make configuring Infinite Scale services easier. The value in the yaml file will be replaced by the actual value of the environment variable at runtime. This makes it possible to use the same config file for different environments without the need to change the config file itself, useful like when using docker compose with `.env` files to run Infinite Scale services.
```

[discrete]
=== New Services

The following services have been added:

* `auth-service`: +

> The Infinite Scale Auth Service is used to authenticate service accounts. Compared to normal accounts, service accounts are Infinite Scale internal only and not available to ordinary users like via LDAP. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/6427[#6427]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Infinite Scale auth-service is used to authenticate service accounts. Compared to normal accounts, service accounts are Infinite Scale internal and not available to ordinary users like via LDAP. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/6427[#6427]
```

* `clientlog`: +
The Infinite Scale clientlog service is responsible for composing machine-readable notifications for clients. Clients are apps and web interfaces. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/7217[#7217]

* `ocm`: +
The Infinite Scale OCM service provides federated sharing functionality based on the ScienceMesh and OCM HTTP APIs. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/7998[#7998]

* `sse`: +

> The Infinite Scale sse service is responsible for sending sse (server-sent events) to a user. The referenced PR https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/6992[#6992] is the initial PR introducing SSE. More PR's have been added to improve and extend the SSE service. For details see the Infinite Scale changelog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Infinite Scale sse service is responsible for sending sse (server-sent events) to a user. The referenced pull request https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/6992[#6992] is the initial PR introducing SSE. More PRs have been added to improve and extend the SSE service. For details see the Infinite Scale changelog.
```

=== Known Issues

This section will be updated if issues are discovered.

=== Deprecation Announcements

> Looking further, in future releases the following may now longer be supported respectively removed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In future releases the following may no longer be supported or get removed:
```

* Resharing feature
* ocs API +
The ocs service may get fully removed.

=== Migrations

[discrete]
==== Changed Environment Variables

// we can keep this section in every release notes as the link and content does not change.
 
* The admin documentation provides a comprehensive list of added and removed environment variables. For details see next@ocis:ROOT:deployment/services/env-var-changes.adoc[Changed Environment Variables in Versions] and select the Infinite Scale version in the URI accordingly. It is strongly recommended to check this list and update your installation accordingly.

[discrete]

> ==== Async Uploads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Asynchronous Uploads
```

* This change sets the default for async uploads `OCIS_ASYNC_UPLOADS` from `false` to `true`. True enables postprocessing for all uploaded files. Note, newer features are based on async uploads and might not work correctly when left to false or turning the feature off manually. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/7416[#7416]

[discrete]
==== Cache Stores

> * Some cache stores as defined in `OCIS_CACHE_STORE` are now marked for deprecation. These are `ocmem`, `redis`, `etcd` and `nats-js`. A new cache store has been added: `nats-js-kv`. If you have used one of the deprecated stores, you should reconfigure to one of the supported ones as the deprecated stores will be removed in a later version. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/7979[#7979]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Some cache stores as defined in `OCIS_CACHE_STORE` are now marked for deprecation. These are `ocmem`, `redis`, `etcd` and `nats-js`. A new cache store has been added: `nats-js-kv`. If you have used one of the deprecated stores, you should change your configuration to use one of the supported ones as the deprecated stores will be removed in a later version. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/7979[#7979]
```

[discrete]
==== Default Registry

> * The default registry of `MICRO_REGISTRY` has been switched from `memory` to `nats-js-kv`. In addition, some registries are now marked for deprecation. These are `nats`, `etcd`, `consul` and `mdns`. If you have manually defined one of the deprecated registries, you should reconfigure to one of the supported ones as the deprecated registries will be removed in a later version. In addition, the environment variables `MICRO_REGISTRY_AUTH_PASSWORD` and `MICRO_REGISTRY_AUTH_USERNAME` can be configured when using a nats cluster. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/8011[#8011]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The default registry of `MICRO_REGISTRY` has been switched from `memory` to `nats-js-kv`. In addition, some registries are now marked for deprecation. These are `nats`, `etcd`, `consul` and `mdns`. If you have manually defined one of the deprecated registries, you should reconfigure to use one of the supported ones as the deprecated registries will be removed in a later version. In addition, the environment variables `MICRO_REGISTRY_AUTH_PASSWORD` and `MICRO_REGISTRY_AUTH_USERNAME` can be configured when using a nats cluster. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/8011[#8011]
```

[discrete]
==== Antivirus Scanning Service

> * The antivirus icap client library has been updated and the antivirus scanning service optimized. Therefore the environment variable `ANTIVIRUS_ICAP_TIMEOUT` has been deprecated and replaced by `ANTIVIRUS_ICAP_SCAN_TIMEOUT`. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/8062[#8062]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The antivirus ICAP client library has been updated and the antivirus scanning service optimized. Therefore the environment variable `ANTIVIRUS_ICAP_TIMEOUT` has been deprecated and replaced by `ANTIVIRUS_ICAP_SCAN_TIMEOUT`. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/8062[#8062]
```

The Infinite Scale auth-service is used to authenticate service accounts. Compared to normal accounts, service accounts are Infinite Scale internal and not available to ordinary users like via LDAP. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/6427[#6427]

* `clientlog`: +
The Infinite Scale clientlog service is responsible for composing machine-readable notifications for clients. Clients are apps and web interfaces. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/7217[#7217]

* `ocm`: +
The Infinite Scale OCM service provides federated sharing functionality based on the ScienceMesh and OCM HTTP APIs. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/7998[#7998]

* `sse`: +
The Infinite Scale sse service is responsible for sending sse (server-sent events) to a user. The referenced pull request https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/6992[#6992] is the initial PR introducing SSE. More PRs have been added to improve and extend the SSE service. For details see the Infinite Scale changelog.

=== Known Issues

This section will be updated if issues are discovered.

=== Deprecation Announcements

In future releases the following may no longer be supported or get removed:

* Resharing feature
* ocs API +

> The ocs service may get fully removed.

Reviewer 2: We need to add the deprecated registries and the deprecated cs3 share manager.

Author: I have clarified the current text, but can you advise or add a text extending the missing things?

> * Resharing feature
> * ocs API +
> The ocs service may get fully removed.

Author: ```suggestion
* The resharing feature +
Existing shares will continue to work, but no new reshares can be created.
* The ocs sharing API +
It will be fully replaced by the new sharing-ng (graph) API
* The store service will get fully removed +
Its tasks will be taken over by other services.
```

To enable file sharing with a user on a different, connected server, an initial invitation needs to be sent. Once this is completed, files can be shared with that user as usual by entering their username, just like with internal users. The only difference is that users from connected instances will be marked as `Federated Users` for easy identification and management.

*Technical Note:* +
Federated cloud sharing in Infinite Scale is based on the Open Cloud Mesh protocol version 1.1 (OCM 1.1) https://cs3org.github.io/OCM-API/docs.html?branch=v1.1.0&repo=OCM-API&user=cs3org#/paths/~1shares/post[Learn more about OCM 1.1]

Kudos to all members of the CS3 community who contributed to this project. A special thanks is owed to CERN for their contribution of the Science Mesh App. Thank You!

[discrete]
=== Password Policy for Sharing Links

The password policy for sharing links allows administrators to set specific requirements for password strength. This feature ensures that your sharing practices align seamlessly with existing security policies.

> The customizable settings for the password are minimum amounts of:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The customizable settings for the password are minimum number of:
```

"minimum amount" is for uncountable things - "the minimum amount of honey"
"minimum number" is for countable things - "the minimum number of biscuits"

[discrete]
=== Experimental: Support of AD FS

Experimental support for AD FS has been added. AD FS `/adfs/.well-known/openid-configuration` has an optional `access_token_issuer` which, in violation of the OpenID Connect spec, takes precedence over `issuer`.

[discrete]
=== Enhanced Extension Capabilities

To enable custom Infinite Scale extensions, custom routes have been added to the Infinite Scale proxy service. More details can be found in the https://owncloud.dev/services/proxy/#configuring-routes[Developer Documentation].

[discrete]
=== Use Environment Variables in yaml Config Files

The ability to use environment variables in yaml config files has been added to make configuring Infinite Scale services easier. The value in the yaml file will be replaced by the actual value of the environment variable at runtime. This makes it possible to use the same config file for different environments without the need to change the config file itself, useful like when using docker compose with `.env` files to run Infinite Scale services.

[discrete]
=== Configurable Eventbus

> The event bus used in many services is now configurable with a set of environment variables starting with `OCIS_EVENTS_xxx`. This is important for scaling when deploying your instance with an orchestration tool like Docker or Kubernetes. External stores used in caching can be reused for the event bus easying the setup. See the _Environment Variables with Special Scope_ documentation for a list of services affected. Each service listed has a detailed description.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The event bus used in many services is now configurable with a set of environment variables starting with `OCIS_EVENTS_xxx`. This is important for scaling when deploying your instance with an orchestration tool like Docker or Kubernetes. External stores used in caching can be reused for the event bus, easing the setup. See the _Environment Variables with Special Scope_ documentation for a list of services affected. Each service listed has a detailed description.
```

* `sse`: +
The Infinite Scale sse service is responsible for sending sse (server-sent events) to a user. The referenced pull request https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/6992[#6992] is the initial PR introducing SSE. More PRs have been added to improve and extend the SSE service. For details see the Infinite Scale changelog.

=== Known Issues

This section will be updated if issues are discovered.

=== Deprecation Announcements

In future releases the following may no longer be supported or get removed:

* The resharing feature +
Existing shares will continue to work, but no new reshares can be created. +
We have disabled the resharing feature by default. It will be removed from the product. Existing reshares will still be visible to the original resource owner. Creation of new reshares will not be possible. Please make sure that `OCIS_ENABLE_RESHARING` is not set to `true` in your deployments. +
* The ocs sharing API +
It will be fully replaced by the new sharing-ng (graph) API
* The store service will get fully removed +
Its tasks will be taken over by other services.

> * Service Registies +

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Service Registries +
```

We deprecated some service registries. If your `MICRO_REGISTRY` config is set to one of these values `mdns, nats, kubernetes, etcd, consul` please use `nats-js-kv` in the future (`memory` is only intended for testing environments).
* Micro caches and stores +

> We deprecated some micro caches and stores. If one of your `*_CACHE_STORE` variables is using one of there values `redis-sentinel, redis, etcd, nats, ocmem` please use `nats-js-kv` in the future (`memory` is only intended for testing environments).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We deprecated some micro caches and stores. If one of your `*_CACHE_STORE` variables is using one of the values `redis-sentinel, redis, etcd, nats, ocmem` please use `nats-js-kv` in the future (`memory` is only intended for testing environments).
```

The following services have been added:

* `auth-service`: +
The Infinite Scale auth-service is used to authenticate service accounts. Compared to normal accounts, service accounts are Infinite Scale internal and not available to ordinary users like via LDAP. https://github.com/owncloud/ocis/pull/6427[#6427] +
--

> WARNING: Service accounts are a breaking change for instances which are upgrading from Infinite Scale 4.0.0 and before. Please make sure to carefully read the [upgrade instructions].

Reviewer 2: @mmattel can you add the correct :xref ?

Author: done
